I think now we'll hear from Bill Williams about Black Diamond, as he remembers it.
The Welsh people of Black Diamond, some of the Welsh came from Nortonville in California,
where they had worked for the coal company, and then the coal company moved to Black Diamond, they continued working for them.
Some people came directly from Wales, some were from other parts of the country.
It is a natural thing for men who are familiar with coal mines to return to work in a coal mine.
It's often said that once a miner, always a miner. I'll disapprove of that later in my talk.
The Welsh people were organizers of churches, lodges, labor unions, teams of baseball and football, and mine rescue teams.
They competed with teams of other mining towns.
The three churches prospered, and when one church had a social or bizarre, people from the other churches would attend.
They supported each other. Black Diamond was a happy town. The citizens were not all Welsh.
There were many people from other European countries, but they intermixed both in joy and sorrow.
There were accidents in the mine, and all citizens felt the loss.
I have spoken of Welsh being leaders who stood for the causes they believed were right.
I am thankful, and I know others are thankful, that the miners persisted at the start of the big union strike, which was in regard to wages.
The coal company brought in strikebreakers and guards to protect them, and they operated the mine while the union and the company worked out a plan to buy the miners' homes because they were built on company property.
This alone will demonstrate that there was no violence, even though some of their neighbors went back to work as strikebreakers.
I wonder if this condition could prevail today without violence. Things have changed.
The union and the miners built a new town about a mile west of Black Diamond and called it Morganville.
Now we are talking about the newcomers and the union miners on strike.
The miners had settled in their new houses, but the post office was in Black Diamond, so the former residents had to go back to Black Diamond to get their mail.
This was always a reminder of where they used to live, but they endured it.
I mentioned to a man who lived there about the absence of violence, and he told me how near they came to violence.
The newcomers at Black Diamond decided that they were going to go down to Morganville and beat up on the union miners.
But one person up there who was sympathetic to the union miners went down and told the men what was planned.
So they got their hunting rifles and went out on the edge of town and got underneath a house and were ready if anything should happen.
And one Welshman walked out to meet them. He said, boys, I'd like to talk to you.
He said, I'd advise you not to start any trouble because, he said, see this house underneath there? See those guns sticking out?
He said, I think you'd better go back where you came from. And they turned around and went back to Black Diamond.
I have mentioned people who have been very prominent in Welsh activities.
But as I have not mentioned names of anything, there is one person that I would like to speak of, was Miss Jenny Edwards.
At the celebration of March 1982 at Westminster Presbyterian Church, she gave a talk.
And as far as I could tell, it was all from memory. She didn't seem to refer to notes at all.
And she gave a wonderful description of the early mining days.
So eventually these miners who had moved out to Morganville went and found jobs at other places away from the mines.
And they built, well, some of them moved to Seattle, some of them to Renton and other little towns.
And they either built new homes or lived in homes that were much better than the homes that they had lived in Black Diamond.
And I must say, in their new homes they even had indoor toilets.
They proved that a coal miner's life was not for life. They could work successfully at other occupations.
Now I've told you about the Welsh miners. You might wonder what eventually became of the Pacific Coast Coal Company.
They sold their seam ship line, the town of Black Diamond, 6,000 acres of land, and a new cement plant which they had in Seattle.
And the company went out of business.
All of that I've told you is in the new book that has just been published called Black Diamond Mining Memories.
It can be purchased at Black Diamond at the Black Diamond Museum.
You will find most everything there in the book except there's one thing I'd like to mention that you won't find.
My company wanted the bosses to work the miners hard.
And there were many who either got fired or left because they wouldn't mistreat the men working for them.
And one of those men was my dad. I wondered why dad wasn't a foreman. He was at one time.
And he pulled a one-man strike. He just didn't go to work.
The mine superintendent who knew him well because he lived just a block away went to dad and asked him what was wrong.
He says, well, I'll tell you. He says, I won't work those men the way they want me to.
He says, they're working hard under very dangerous conditions.
He says, well, all right. He says, I'll find you another job. So he did.
He found him a job as an operator of the water pumps to pump the water out of the mine.
So I don't want you feeling sorry for the poor coal company.
As the saying goes, so you shall reap. They lost everything. Thank you.
Thank you.